Add compatibility-mode.md proposal. (#4321)
gpuweb/gpuweb: proposals/compatibility-mode.md

    boolean compatibilityMode = false;
}
```

When calling `GPU.RequestAdapter()`, passing `compatibilityMode = true` in the `GPURequestAdapterOptions` will indicate to the User Agent to select the Compatibility subset of WebGPU. Any Devices created from the resulting Adapter on supporting UAs will support only Compatibility mode. Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

Note that a supporting User Agent may return a `compatibilityMode = true` Adapter which is backed by a fully WebGPU-capable hardware adapter, such as D3D12, Metal or Vulkan, so long as it validates all subsequent API calls made on the Adapter and the objects it vends against the Compatibility subset.

```webidl
partial interface GPUAdapter {
    readonly attribute boolean isCompatibilityMode;
}
```

As a convenience to the developer, the Adapter returned will have the `isCompatibilityMode` property set to `true`.

```webidl
partial dictionary GPUTextureDescriptor {
    GPUTextureViewDimension viewDimension;
}
```

See "Texture view dimension may be specified", below.

## Compatibility mode restrictions

### 1. Texture view dimension may be specified 

> When specifying a texture, a `viewDimension` property determines the views which can be bound from that texture for sampling (see "Proposed IDL changes", above). Binding a view of a different dimension for sampling than specified at texture creation time will cause a validation error. If `viewDimension` is unspecified, use the following algorithm:

Reviewer: nit:
```suggestion
When specifying a texture, a `viewDimension` property determines the views which can be bound from that texture for sampling (see "Proposed IDL changes", above). Binding a view of a different dimension for sampling than specified at texture creation time will cause a validation error. If `viewDimension` is unspecified, use [the same algorithm as `createView()`](https://gpuweb.github.io/gpuweb/#abstract-opdef-resolving-gputextureviewdescriptor-defaults):
```

> When specifying a texture, a `viewDimension` property determines the views which can be bound from that texture for sampling (see "Proposed IDL changes", above). Binding a view of a different dimension for sampling than specified at texture creation time will cause a validation error. If `viewDimension` is unspecified, use the following algorithm:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When creating a texture, the `viewDimension` property determines the `dimension` of the view which can be created from that texture (see "Proposed IDL changes", above). Creating a view of a different dimension than specified at texture creation time will cause a validation error. If `viewDimension` is unspecified, use the following algorithm:
```

I'd clarify this is not specific to binding for sampling.

Reviewer 3: This is specific to using a texture as a TEXTURE_BINDING. In particular when you pass a texture view to `createBindGroup` is where this validation would apply.  For a RENDER_ATTACHMENT the viewDimension is not used. Instead, the existing non-compat validation suffice (https://www.w3.org/TR/webgpu/#abstract-opdef-renderable-texture-view)

Reviewer 3: To put it another way, you can create any view you can create in non-compat. It's only when you actually use the view does validation change from non-compat. The validation being specified here only happens on `createBindGroup`  Error if `view.dimension !== texture.viewDimension`

Reviewer: I had forgotten it happened in createBindGroup instead of createView. It makes sense though since texture views don't actually exist in GLES.

I wonder if `viewDimension` should be more clearly named? Like `textureBindingViewDimension`...

Reviewer 2: We should change the name if we validate this later but why not validate it earlier (at view creation)? I think it would make things clearer.

Reviewer 3: You can't validate a view creation because then you could not render to a cube map or a 2d array. To render to (to use as a RENDER_ATTACHMENT) requires that you use a '2d' dimension

```js
const pass = encoder.beginRenderPass({
    label: 'render to the positive Z face of a cube map',
    colorAttachments: [
      {
        view: myCubeMapTexture.createView({
          dimension: '2d',
          baseArrayLayer: 4,
          arrayLayerCount: 1,
          baseMipLevel: 0,
          mipLeveLCount: 1,
        }),
        ...
      },
    ],
});
```

vs, use as TEXTURE_BINDING cubemap

```js
    const bindGroup = device.createBindGroup({
      layout: pipeline.getBindGroupLayout(0),
      entries: [
        { binding: 0, resource: sampler },
        { binding: 1, resource: myCubeMapTexture.createView({dimension: 'cube'}) },
      ],
    });
```

Reviewer 2: I see, thanks for the clarification!

Author: I've left this as-is for now. Let me know if there are further edits desired here.

Reviewer 2: I still think it should be renamed; I'm ok with @kainino0x suggestion of `textureBindingViewDimension`.

## Goals

The primary goal of WebGPU Compatibility mode is to increase the reach of WebGPU by providing an opt-in, slightly restricted subset of WebGPU which will run on older APIs such as D3D11 and OpenGL ES. This will increase adoption of WebGPU applications via a wider userbase.

Since WebGPU Compatibility mode is a subset of WebGPU, all valid Compatibility mode applications are also valid WebGPU applications. Consequently, Compatibility mode applications will also run on user agents which do not support Compatibility mode. Such user agents will simply ignore the option requesting a Compatibility mode Adapter and return a Core WebGPU Adapter instead.

## WebGPU Spec Changes

```webidl
partial dictionary GPURequestAdapterOptions {
    boolean compatibilityMode = false;
}
```

> When calling `GPU.RequestAdapter()`, passing `compatibilityMode = true` in the `GPURequestAdapterOptions` will indicate to the User Agent to select the Compatibility subset of WebGPU. Any Devices created from the resulting Adapter on supporting UAs will support only Compatibility mode. Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

Author: I think the first part is covered in the "Goals" section above: "Since WebGPU Compatibility mode is a subset of WebGPU, all valid Compatibility mode applications are also valid WebGPU applications. Consequently, Compatibility mode applications will also run on user agents which do not support Compatibility mode."

I've added a sentence about reducing the restrictions to a minimum in the same section.

> When calling `GPU.RequestAdapter()`, passing `compatibilityMode = true` in the `GPURequestAdapterOptions` will indicate to the User Agent to select the Compatibility subset of WebGPU. Any Devices created from the resulting Adapter on supporting UAs will support only Compatibility mode. Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

Reviewer 2: To clarify: do all implementations have to add the compat validation even if a non-compat adapter has been returned?

> Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

I'm interpreting this as a "yes".

I think this is fine either way but it's worth clarifying since I don't remember this being discussed.

> When calling `GPU.RequestAdapter()`, passing `compatibilityMode = true` in the `GPURequestAdapterOptions` will indicate to the User Agent to select the Compatibility subset of WebGPU. Any Devices created from the resulting Adapter on supporting UAs will support only Compatibility mode. Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

Author: Depends what you mean by "non-compat adapter". If the developer requests compatibilityMode, then a supporting UA will return an Adapter that will validate all calls made on it against the Compatibility subset, even if the underlying physical device happens to be D3D12 or Vulkan, for example. Is that what you're asking?

(Nit: to me, such an Adapter is a "compat adapter", not a "non-compat adapter", since it appears to the developer to obey all the same constraints as one backed by OpenGL ES.)

> When calling `GPU.RequestAdapter()`, passing `compatibilityMode = true` in the `GPURequestAdapterOptions` will indicate to the User Agent to select the Compatibility subset of WebGPU. Any Devices created from the resulting Adapter on supporting UAs will support only Compatibility mode. Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

Reviewer 2: So, when a user asks for `compatibilityMode = true` they can either get a "compat adapter" or a "non-compat adapter" depending on whether or not the UA supports the WebGPU Compat mode.

The problem I see is that there is no way for the user to know whether the UA supports the WebGPU Compat mode or not.
I see this being an issue for developers trying to test their compat apps on an UA that doesn't support compat and subsequently not getting any compat validation errors.

> When calling `GPU.RequestAdapter()`, passing `compatibilityMode = true` in the `GPURequestAdapterOptions` will indicate to the User Agent to select the Compatibility subset of WebGPU. Any Devices created from the resulting Adapter on supporting UAs will support only Compatibility mode. Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

Reviewer 2: Was this written this way to make it easy to unship the compat mode in the future? If so, I guess this is fine but we should add a note somewhere in the spec that clarifies the fact that compat validation errors are not guaranteed on UAs that don't support the compat mode.

> When calling `GPU.RequestAdapter()`, passing `compatibilityMode = true` in the `GPURequestAdapterOptions` will indicate to the User Agent to select the Compatibility subset of WebGPU. Any Devices created from the resulting Adapter on supporting UAs will support only Compatibility mode. Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

Reviewer 3: > I see this being an issue for developers trying to test their compat apps on an UA that doesn't support compat and subsequently not getting any compat validation errors.

It's not that difficult to provide a JavaScript extension or JS library that enforces most compat mode validation. I've written an incomplete one [here](https://github.com/greggman/webgpu-dev-extension/blob/main/extension/scripts/webgpu-compat-validation.js) and would be happy to complete it. Not sure if that helps this issue

> When calling `GPU.RequestAdapter()`, passing `compatibilityMode = true` in the `GPURequestAdapterOptions` will indicate to the User Agent to select the Compatibility subset of WebGPU. Any Devices created from the resulting Adapter on supporting UAs will support only Compatibility mode. Calls to APIs unsupported by Compatibility mode will result in validation errors.

Author: Actually, I don't believe the initial motivation was related to unshipping. We were unsure whether all browser vendors would be willing to make Compatibility mode a required part of the WebGPU spec, or leave it optional. You're right that developers would be unable to test against compatibility mode if their browser did not support it. If all vendors are comfortable making it mandatory, we could reconsider the language above.

That said, I believe it is possible to check if a browser's support by checking the "isCompatibilityMode" property on the returned Adapter.

```webidl
partial interface GPUAdapter {
    readonly attribute boolean isCompatibilityMode;
}
```

As a convenience to the developer, the Adapter returned will have the `isCompatibilityMode` property set to `true`.

```webidl
partial dictionary GPUTextureDescriptor {
    GPUTextureViewDimension viewDimension;
}
```

See "Texture view dimension may be specified", below.

## Compatibility mode restrictions

### 1. Texture view dimension may be specified 

When specifying a texture, a `viewDimension` property determines the views which can be bound from that texture for sampling (see "Proposed IDL changes", above). Binding a view of a different dimension for sampling than specified at texture creation time will cause a validation error. If `viewDimension` is unspecified, use the following algorithm:
```
if desc.dimension is "1d":
    set viewDimension to "1d"
if desc.dimension is "2d":
  if desc.size.depthOrArrayLayers is 1:
    set viewDimension to "2d"

>   if desc.size.depthOrArrayLayers is 6:

Reviewer 3: More apps will run with fewer changes like this

>   if desc.size.depthOrArrayLayers is 6:

Reviewer: meeting: consensus to remove this special case, and match the defaulting rules that createView has.

>   if desc.size.depthOrArrayLayers is 6:

Author: Modified to remove the 6-layer special case, as per CG consensus.
